>> My name's Matthew Formica, I'm the Developer Tools
Software Evangelist in Apple's Developer Relations Group
and this session is Getting Started with Xcode.
So as you may have seen in the
previous session in this room,
Xcode is the integrated development environment you'll
use to write your code on Mac OS X and it's got a lot
of advanced features; features you've probably
seen demo'd yesterday in the state of the union.
But if you're new to Mac OS X Development with Xcode you may
be wondering how do the standard every day features work.
How do you use Xcode in a regular work
flow and how do you get the fuller picture
of what Xcode can do and that's what this session is for.
How many of you were at the earlier session?
Okay, a chunk of you.
How many of you are relatively new to Mac OS X Development?
Good, then this is the right session for you.
This is going to be a session for you if you are
new to Xcode or to the Mac and if you're doing one
of the two types of, two of the types of development that
were talked about in the state of the union yesterday.
Writing native code for the Mac or doing
open source development on the Mac.
What we're going to cover is the basics of Xcode 3.0, starting
with first steps and first launch of Xcode all the way
through the development cycle: editing,
building and debugging your code.
And you're going to see all of
this in both slides and demos.
So let's jump right in.
Xcode ships with Leopard when you install the development
tools they'll live in /Developer by default,
that's where you can find them on your hard drive.
And I should make one note, which is that Xcode 2.4.1
is the current shipping version
on Tiger our current GM release, but we're not going
to be talking about that version in this session.
You can see when you open the developer folder
that Xcode will be one of the icons in that folder
in the applications directory inside of that folder.
And when you double click it for the first time, you'll
get a new user assistant that looks something like this.
The assistant's going to help you with
some basic configuration as you get set up.
The first thing it's going to ask you is
where do you want to save intermediated files
for your build and final results and products.
And generally, the defaults are fine
you can just click through that.
The other thing it'll ask you is do you want your
window configuration to be saved when you quit Xcode
so that when you launch it again the next time all
those windows will come back where they were.
Some people like it, some people don't, it's your choice.
After setting up your initial configuration you'll be
presented with the Xcode news panel and this will show
up whenever you launch Xcode to give you up to the minute
information about new updates to Xcode, documentation tips
and tricks, links to sample code and so on.
It's a great jumping off point to explore the
documentation and find out about what's new with Xcode.
Typically as you get started on a project you
won't actually be starting with a blank project.
Instead you'll choose from one of the templates that we
have that are preconfigured for building all kinds of things
on Mac OS X. these templates give you prewritten
source code and projects that are designed
to help get you started whether you're trying to build
basic Cocoa applications or screen saver plug ins,
kernel extensions or whatever else
you're trying to build on the platform.
Once you pick a template, give it a name,
you'll be presented with the project window.
And if you're coming over from Visual Studio I believe their
word for this is solution, in Xcode we call them projects.
It's basically the container where
you'll do all of your development.
And the project window has a variety of different components
to it; first of all there's the tool bar with a variety
of easy access buttons to do things
like building and cleaning.
Some of them have a little triangle on the edge, and if
you click and hold you'll actually get a little pop down
and it gives you extended choices
for more things you can do.
On the left side of your project window is the
groups and files list and this is where you're going
to see all the source files in your project as well
as any resources you may have associated with it.
At the bottom there is actually additional
other groups for special purposes.
For example, your find results can show up there so you
can easily jump back to previous finds that you did.
You could also see for example all the symbols
in your project by going to the right group.
The right hand side of the project window is the detail
view and this will either show you a list of files
in a particular folder in your project or it can
actually show you the actual contents of a file.
You could also double click source
files to open them in a separate window.
Typically as you're working on code you'll want to bring
up our full documentation viewer,
this is what the window looks like.
And it gives you nice documentation sets; grouping
various APIs and functionality in Mac OS X.
And you can actually subscribe to feeds for these
different sets you get automatically notified
when the documentation is updated.
And when you're doing searches, you can search
on specific strings in the documentation,
on particular APIs or even titles of documents.
So there's a lot of flexibility here
for finding things in the documentation.
Okay, so you've got your basic project set
up, you know where to find documentation.
You'll probably spend most of the time in
your development process in the code editor.
So let's talk about that next.
Xcode's code editor does what you would
expect any powerful code editor to do.
It helps you write code quickly and easily
with a smooth work flow via such features
as syntax coloring, bookmarks, various pop ups and so on.
Here's a screen shot of Xcode's code editor, you can see
the syntax coloring, you can actually customize that.
It also has a tool bar on top that
gives you similar quick access
as the project window did to things
like building and cleaning.
Below the main toolbar is a little mini pop up bar that
let's you quickly jump through things like all the headers
that you have included in this particular source
file, so you can easily navigate your code.
And Xcode has code completion, there's two styles
actually; one is the mail style complete and place
and you can also have Xcode give you a full
function pop up that gives you all the choices.
Either way it's going to complete as you type
and reduce the amount of typing you have to do.
As we demo'd yesterday in the state of the
union, Xcode has code folding and code focus.
You can collapse chunks of code so you can get a
better picture of the layout of your source file
and the particular chunk of code
you actually want to work on.
And message bubbles are also imbedded in Xcode's code editor.
This allows you to see errors and warnings for your
code when you're building without having to jump
to some other build results panel that might
be obscuring the code that you just wrote.
So Xcode's editor goes beyond simple things like syntax
coloring and indentation to providing you a rich environment
for your complete work flow as you work on your application.
And at this time I'd like to bring up
Scott Tooker to do a demo of the editor.
>> So just to give a little overview here, the project we're
looking at is sketch which you can actually find as one
of the developer examples on your developer DVD.
Just a quick question, how many people
here are coming from a Windows background?
UNIX background?
Okay. One thing I wanted to point out is I'm working
here in what's called the grouped editor mode.
We're going to be staying mostly in editor for this demo.
The Xcode does allow you to have one window per file,
but for the purposes of this demo we
wanted to show off the group mode.
So I'm your tour guide and I'm going to start off by
showing you the navigation bar part of the editor.
This is this thin strip up here and
everything in here is about getting,
moving within your file or moving
to different related files.
And so the one part you'll use the
most, probably over ninety percent
of the time is the function pop up or symbol pop up.
So you notice here what I get is I get a layout of here, all
the, here's all the symbolic information in this file kind
of laid out as you'd find it moving through the file.
So for example I can click on mouse
down, it takes me to mouse down.
Now we also support, if you hold down option
key, you can get an alphabetical listing.
So in some cases depending on how the files laid out it's
easier to go with alphabet, sometimes it's better to go
with how the original author laid out the file.
Some of the other ways we can get around
files as Matt pointed out is bookmarks.
So, for example, right now I've got one in here,
it says start here for the debugging demo.
And you'll notice that just jumps
me to a given selection in the code.
You can also, for example, if I wanted to go to the top and
be able to jump where my imports are, you can select a range
and then go to edit, add to bookmarks,
it's command D just like Safari.
And by default we'll offer to label this
with the line you started your selection on,
but I can name if anything I want
so for example, my My Imports.
And then this will show up in the little bookmark
pop up here and I can just jump around my code.
This is really useful when you're exploring code or
when you're dealing with code you know intimately
and you just want to have some metadata that allows you
to quickly get to places but you don't necessarily want to
or you may not be able to edit the file itself.
Some other things we provide and this is new to, this next
one's new to Xcode 3.0 is we provide class navigation now.
So for example you'll notice I popped on, I bring
up the C here and I can see the super classes
for this class, I can also see categories on it.
And so let's jump to NS View and so you
can see here, here are the super classes
of NS View itself, various subclasses and categories.
And for those of you that have
had experience with Objective-C,
you know that categories sometimes can be especially
interesting to find since they may end up in different files
and so this is a convenient way to see
all the potential categories on a class.
Now for those of you who aren't doing a lot of object
oriented programming, maybe you're more C based, for example,
or C++, we also provide an include pop up.
And so here what we're showing you is what is included
by this file and then which files include this
and so this provides you a nice way to kind
of move up and down in your include hierarchy.
Now you may notice that when I'm using either the
include hierarchy or I'm using the class navigator,
it takes you to the definitions
of the classes or the headers.
So, well, how do I get quickly back to my implementation.
Well in this case we provide what's called the counterpart,
so here I'm in SKTGraphicView.h,
which is my definition.
But I can just click this little button here to
swap quickly to the implementation for that file.
This is probably the second thing you'll
use the most, next to the function pop up.
Okay, so now let's jump over to the left side.
One thing you've been noticing is I've been opening
these files because it's grouped they're showing
up in the same window, well, what you can do if you,
for example, want to get back to a separate file,
you can actually just bring this file pop up
here and we'll just let you jump back and forth.
So for example I can go back to NS View.
You'll also notice, although it's a little bit hard to
see here on this screen that we actually do badge the files
in the pop up to show you which ones are locked or not.
In addition, we can also use the go back and
go forward arrows and these just let you step
through the files that you've been looking at.
And then I mentioned you know we
badge files that are locked,
well we also provide you the ability to control that.
Over here at the very edge we have a lock
icon and this actually maps for those of you
with classic Mac OS experience or some Mac OS X
experience, this maps to the Finders lock flag.
For those of you coming from UNIX,
that's the unchangeable flag.
And so you can go in here and just lock down a file if, for example,
you want to make sure you don't make any changes to it,
or if you're using something like Perforce,
it's one way to make sure you can have a file
to be unlocked so you can go ahead and edit it.
Okay, so before I jump, that's basically the navigator bar.
As I said everything in the navigator bar is
predominantly about getting around your files,
getting around the file you're in, going to other
files, getting you there quickly and easily.
One final thing I wanted to talk about
that's kind of in between the navigator bar
and the actual editor view is our split view button.
And so what I can do here is I can just click and get
any number of splits that I want and I can also hold
down option and I can get side by side splitting.
I should point out the one thing we don't do currently that
we, it's a requested feature, is that we don't allow you
to mix splits right now so you can do all horizontal,
you can do all vertical but you can't do both currently.
So let's move on to the main editor window.
As you can see in Xcode 3.0 we have enhanced syntax
coloring here and this is something actually
that, not only do we provide a number of different
languages, you can actually customize the syntax coloring
to your liking.
For example I'm using a custom set right now.
We found out really late that we were going to
have a lot more room on the screen so I went ahead
and bumped up the fonts right before the session.
But there are a lot of different types of, a
lot of control you have here so, for example,
and you'll have to forgive the fonts getting smaller
but we have the default look and then we have things
like the basic look or bare which are very, very simple
if you don't want a lot of information showing up.
But we also allow you to control things like
the background colors so you can even do things
like midnight where we swap in a black background.
So let's go back to my large fonts.
We also provide control for our indentation which uses the
same syntactic information we're using for syntax coloring,
we also provide good automatic indentation support and also
we're using that same information when we do code sense.
So let me go ahead, I'm going to jump to this align, we're
going to spend a lot of time in align left I did yesterday.
So let's jump there for right now
and make this window a little larger.
Whoa, let me just give myself a little room here.
So what I'm going to show you now is the code,
we have two kind of basic styles of code sense.
One is we can automatically, we can not
automatically suggest and it's all user driven.
You hold down a key, pops up a
menu, you can choose from that.
What I'm actually going to show you is a mode
that's new to Xcode 3.0 which is automatically,
we always suggest, it's much like mail's inline completion.
So for example what you'll notice is as I type
Xcode's automatically completing what I want.
Now I can just keep typing and it will change.
I can type the entire word here and it never gets in your
way, so you can have it on, it will give you suggestions,
but you're never going to get in the situation where it
will try to override what you're doing; you're in control.
So here I've got selection and so if
we want to bring up something else.
So now at this point I've got the
first, I've got objected index here.
Now there's two different things I can do here,
I can, well many things, I can continue to type,
I can hold down the escape key to pop up a menu
and I go up and select something out of here.
But the other thing I can do is I can also use control
period to actually cycle through and in this case,
and you'll notice here it'll just let me cycle
through the various choices directly there
and in this case I want an observe value for key path.
Not that I'm actually going to do anything with this beyond
the code sense, but we wanted to actually also show off the fact
that you'll see we have these placeholders here for
example string key path, idObject, NS Dictionary.
If you use control slash we have this nice
feature where you can just cycle right through
and go straight to each one and fill it in.
So that's just a really quick introduction to code sense.
We'll be talking more about this
in the New Workflow Xcode session.
So let's go ahead and revert that.
So the other thing we did, you know code sense,
it's a common feature of a lot of editors,
we wanted to go a little bit further and
so we have all this syntactic information
and we understand the structure we
code but what can we do with that.
Well there's two things we did.
The first was a little, it's something new
and the second was just an outgrowth of that.
And the first things which was new, we introduced
what we call code focus and so what this allows you
to do is have a very graphical representation of
where your scope, where your current scope is.
So you'll notice right now, the current scope is in white
and as I get further away it gets darker and darker.
And this provides a really nice visual cue to
understanding exactly what's in scope when you're writing.
And this works not just when editing
but also when debugging.
In addition, as a part of this, we also
added the ability to collapse code.
So, for example, we'll just put in a little glyph here
and you can either come back to the focus ribbon here
or you can just go ahead and double
click on the glyph to open it.
Also, if you go under view in code folding we
added some nice conveniences like, for example,
if you want to fold all your methods and functions,
you'll notice that even though it says fold all, what we
were smart enough to know is that, oh, you are in this scope
so we're going to leave this method open.
So it really allows you to zero in on what you're working
on and not have the feature get in the way of your coding.
We also have the same capabilities from, oops, from the
contextual menu which you can either right click
or control click to bring up and so
I'm going to go ahead and unfold.
Now the last thing I wanted to
touch on here was documentation.
As Matt mentioned, we have a great documentation viewer, a
lot of great features in Xcode 3.0, but how do you get to it?
Well, there are two features that lead up to this and
then one of them that's a very common thing that lots
of people use is called command double clicking.
And what this allows you to do is it uses the
indexed information and so, for example, I'm going
to command double click on objected index and when I do
that I jump automatically to the definition in the header.
Well that's great, unfortunately a lot of
times the headers can be a little bit terse
in what they might be able to tell you about a given method.
So you can also option click on any symbol and then
will automatically bring up the documentation window
and you'll notice here that now I have the information
about objected index, I can read through it and if,
let's expand this window out a little bit, you'll
notice that I can also, it has other references
and it's just a nice way to get straight into the
documentation and learn more about the Mac OS X APIs.
So with that you can see, and I've just
touched the surface here by the way,
there's lost of stuff that I've either glossed
over or have not covered about our editor,
but I think this gives you a kind of good introduction
to the layout of the editor and so that's it.
Thanks Matt.
>> Thank you Scott.
( Clapping )
So what did we see there.
We saw that Xcode's editor gives you powerful
workflow features to help speed your development.
We saw things like code completion and both modes that it
works in, we saw the code folding and code focus features,
where we take advantage of the information Xcode has about
your project allow you to easily collapse chunks of code
that you're not interested in seeing right now.
And Scott showed you the navigator bar where
you can easily jump around to various chunks
of your code and navigate around smoothly.
Scott also showed you a lot of key
equivalents that you'll want to start learning
as you use Xcode to become even more productive.
And he showed you some of the key ones, some of the
key, key equivalents for things like code completion
where a tab completes and escape brings up a pop up menu
and then control period actually let's
you cycle through the different choices.
He also showed you things like how to
indent code and how to jump to definition;
command double click, option double click.
And we could see from that in general
in Xcode as with other Mac OS X apps,
option action actually does a related behavior.
So option double clicking brings you to the documentation,
option clicking the split view control
actually creates the split the other way.
And as you may have already heard there's a whole session
on Xcode's editor the New Development
Workflow, that's tomorrow morning in Presidio.
Let's talk about the build system next.
Xcode's build system architecture is fast,
configurable and built on industry standards.
And the industry standards we build
on are things like the GCC Compiler.
4.0.1 is the default in Leopard, the
ld linker and gdb for our debugging capabilities,
but Xcode builds a lot of functionality on top of these
industry standard components, enabling you to do more
than you would be able to easily do with those tools.
Let's talk about some of the terminology
and concepts that allow Xcode to do this.
Xcode has this concept of targets.
The target explains how to build a particular product.
You think of targets as the recipe and your source
code and other graphical resources as the ingredients.
And the target tells Xcode how to put all those
things together to make what you are trying to build.
If you're coming from Visual Studio, I think the terminology
they use is project, so we're a little cross purposes
with them over terminology, but
in Xcode it's called the target.
And one project in Xcode can contain multiple targets.
So you've got your project window you may be building
both an application and a shared library it depends on
and each of those would be its own target.
Xcode has a target inspector that allows you to configure
both your project and your target and there's a variety
of settings involved that allow you to
tweak various aspects of your target.
These settings are called build settings.
So how do targets tell Xcode how
to actually build your code.
It's through these build settings.
These build settings control all
aspects of compilation and linking.
And you can see a few examples of build settings.
They're generally some setting name, some
value name that tells Xcode what to do.
Now you can actually set up build settings and their
values at either the project level or in specific targets.
What happens is you set some settings
in your project and some in your target.
But your target values override
whatever you've set at the project level.
So settings flow down from the project,
they could be overridden by the target,
and eventually they are actually
used to build your source code.
The basic rule that you'll want to
use when trying to figure out where
to put your particular build settings is you'll
want to set general policy at your project level.
For example, if you've got a set of warnings
that you want all of your targets to use,
set that build setting at the project level.
On the other hand you can customize
specific settings for your target.
For example, what do you want your
final executable to be named.
You don't want to set that for all targets in a
project, you want to set that on a per target basis.
One additional level of detail, you can actually have multiple
sets of build settings for a given project and target.
And these different sets of settings
are called build configurations.
We actually give you a couple of build
configurations by default: debug and release.
And you can see how these would be useful.
You would use the debug build configuration when you
want to have an optimizations off and you want to build
for the native architecture of
the machine you're actually on.
And this is useful when you're doing your
iterative development cycle on that actual machine.
You'll switch over to the release build configuration when
you want to do final testing and preparation for release
of your product and it might have optimizations on and build
a universal binary for all of the different architectures
for Mac OS X. And you can define your own build
configurations for specific needs you may have
Once Xcode and the targets know what build settings to
apply the targets are going to follow a series of steps
in a pipeline to actually build your product.
And these steps are called build phases.
And there are some standard build
phases that almost every target has.
Things like compiling your sources
and actually linking things together.
But you can actually customize how Xcode builds
things by adding some custom build phases.
For example, you could add a copy files build phase that
at a certain point in your build actually moves files
from point A to point B. Or you could have
shell script build phase and this allows you
to basically do anything as a part of your build.
Maybe it's update a given webpage, build a tar
file for your final binary or whatever it is else
that you want to do as a part of your build.
Once you actually click build and it starts executing
all these build phases you'll see errors and warnings
in message bubbles right in line in your code editor.
And in general this is what you want because
you just wrote usually this chunk of code,
why should you have to go somewhere
else to see what's wrong with it.
Sometimes however, you actually are going to
want to bring up the build results window,
particularly if you are doing a clean build
of your entire project and want to see errors
and warnings across your entire source base.
And Command B will bring up the build results window or when
you have errors and warnings, the bottom right hand corner
of the editor window will actually allow you to
click there and bring up the build results window.
And you'll see all the errors and warnings you may have and
you can actually select them and see them right in line
in your code to fix the problem right there.
So we allow you to work either way.
When you're working on a chunk of code you just wrote,
you can see message bubbles right in line to fix things,
when you're doing a complete clean build of a large project,
you might want to bring up the build results window.
I'd like to bring up Scott Tooker again
to show you a demo of the build system.
( Clapping )
>> So one of the interesting things I've demo'd the
build system a lot and the thing I've learned is
that demoing actual building is boring so I
went ahead and built while Matt was talking
so that we could get to the interesting stuff.
So you'll notice here I've built and of course my tendency
to make typos has bit me because
I have some warnings and errors.
So you notice what we do is we provide
warning and error information right in line
and so, for example, you get the same, this is the same
message you would get in a normal build log and it's local,
sorry, it is local to where the warning or error occurred.
We can go ahead and we can hide these if we
want and they will just flow with the code.
Now this is great and most of time this is exactly what you
want, you don't want to have to jump to a separate window.
However there are times when you want to see the
bigger picture so you'll notice down here in the corner
where it says failed, we also have these
little icons of warnings and errors.
Now you can click on any of these little images
and that'll bring up the build results window.
So this is how the build results window comes up by default.
You'll notice up top I have an outline
view here that lists my warnings and errors
and it groups them by which file is being compiled.
You'll notice that in this mode we're only
showing you files that had warnings and errors.
And then below if I go ahead and
select the warnings and errors
that they'll actually jump to the proper place in the file.
Well, that's great.
And sometimes for example, I don't care
about warnings, especially if I'm bringing
over a new project I may have a bunch of
warnings, I just want to get it to build.
So we also provide you the easy ability here
with the warning icon button to just go ahead
and hide those warnings for now
and we won't show them to you.
However, sometimes you want more information.
You want to know exactly what happened.
So we kind of have two stages of this;
in addition to showing you the warnings,
we can actually show you all the build steps.
And so if I click the check mark
here now we get to see everything,
including stuff that just succeeded and went well.
And so you can see exactly what happened.
Well, not exactly, because you can see these are all
summary lines, but what if you want more detail.
Well, we also provide the build transcript.
So let me go ahead and hide the editor window for a second.
And here's the build transcript and you'll notice as I click
on these steps we actually highlight the actual commands
that Xcode used to send to GCC or
the underlying tools or to the shell.
And so for example if I go and look at my warning, I can
even look at, for example, the compile line and you can do
for example comparisons of, oh, let me look at this compile
that succeeded, let me look at this compile that failed.
We give you all the information right there.
The text in this window you can select it, you can copy/
paste it to other people and you can even take the lines
and it's a full complete line so you can use it with GCC.
So that's the build results window, it's there for you.
One, for those of you who are used to having a separate
window we definitely provide it, it's fully functional.
It's also a place to go when you need an overview.
But as I said earlier, most of
the time this is just overkill.
It's a separate window; it's got you out of your flow.
Instead you can do most of what you need to
do just simply right in the window itself.
So for example in this case, I see where
my warnings and errors are, I can just,
and this is why we do sacrifices to demo gods?
( Laughter )
Come on.
( Sigh )
Okay, we're going to move on to the next part of the demo.
The next part of the demo is the fun part of the demo
where I get to talk to you about something that I used
to be responsible for which is the target inspector.
So Matt talked a little bit about the target inspector and
talked about projects and targets and so I'm just going
to give you a little guided tour of
looking at build settings for the target.
So what you'll notice is, sorry I did that a little
quickly, what you can do is go into the project window here
and you can open, just close targets over here and you
can double click on targets to bring up the window.
You can also say edit active target, to go ahead
and bring up this get info window for the target.
The tab we're going to look at today is the build tab.
This shows all the build settings and
right now we're showing everything.
We're saying okay from my bug defiguration
show me all the settings.
And as you can see there are a lot of settings.
In fact there are a lot that you'll never care about and
so one of the things we wanted to provide was quick ways
for you to get the settings you might care about.
So what I'm going to look for is I
want to look for my prefix header
because I want to make sure that I'm precompiling it.
So what I can do is type into the field
here and type prefix and you'll notice
that you're automatically filtering while still
keeping things grouped in an outline view.
You'll also notice, well here's my prefix
header and it is being pre compiled,
but the prefix header's in bold, what's that about?
Well, because you can set things at multiple
levels most notably the project and the target,
we needed a way to show you that you've
set this for the target in this case.
And so that's what the bold means;
it means this was set at this level.
And we've also provided a convenient short cut in the show pop up here
to say well I can look at all settings
defined at this level.
And then I can see this is the only one with prefix,
I can remove the search filter and then I get
to see well here's all the things I define in my target.
And as you can see they're all things specific
to just this target; the prefix header,
the product name, what extension it might use.
And just to give a quick look in comparison, to kind of
give a concrete example of what Matt was talking about.
If we bring up the project settings
which we can bring up in a similar way,
double clicking on the project brings up a get info window.
You can notice that if I look at the settings I define
for the project, they tend to be more generic things.
What SDK I want to use, how do I want
to debug, what formats do I want to use.
And what we are strongly encouraging people think
about it this way, anything that can be shared
across targets should move up to the project.
Because what we want to do is make it so
it's real easy for you to go one place.
Change it there and then not worry about, oh, did I
remember in my fifteenth target to change that setting.
So as you can see, oh and oh sorry, there's
one final thing, one last thing I wanted
to show off was the research assistant and
how it integrates in the build settings.
So one thing you may notice is this is great, you're giving
me titles, you're giving me values but I'm new to the Mac,
I'm new to the Xcode, I don't know what any of these
things mean how can I find out more information.
Well in most cases this is as easy as just selecting one
of the build settings and just clicking this little button
down here to show the research assistant.
Hey, let's move this over here.
And so you'll notice what the research assistant
does is it tells me the localized name, which we show
and then it also gives me just as a
convenience the actual raw build setting name.
This is useful sometimes if you want to reference these
build settings and shell scripts or from the command line.
But the meat of it here is this abstract.
So this is a bunch of help text, it
tells you what the function's for,
how it works and gives you additional information.
And so I can have this research assistant open and I can
basically kind of browse through my different settings
and see what these different settings mean.
And so it provides a really nice way to get
to learn more about your project easier.
And once again this is just a brief kind of
snapshot of what the build system is about.
There's a lot that we haven't talked about
here like build phases and other things.
I'd encourage people that are interested in the build
system, there's a talk later on Wednesday evening
about the build system in depth, it is very good to go to.
Matt.
>> Thank you Scott.
( Clapping )
So what you saw was that the build system allows you
to easily see errors and warnings in lining your codes,
you can fix them right next to
the line of code you just wrote.
And when you need more contexts you can
build up, bring up the build results panel
and Scott showed how you can get a lot of additional
information out of the build results panel,
including the complete GCC build
transcript which is sometimes helpful.
And finally we touched on customizing your build
with the target inspector and build settings
and you could go into a lot more depth on that.
We actually, oops, not that slide yet,
as he said, we actually have a session
on the build system tomorrow evening at 5:00 I believe.
So there's a couple other concepts that I just wanted
to touch on briefly that you should know about relating
to the build system and these will require further
exploration on your part because they can be fairly complex
but they're important for you to know these
are there and start getting familiar with them.
The first is the concept of SDKs.
Now these are, we have Mac OS X SDKs that we
provide with Xcode and these are specialized SDKs.
They're a little different than the SDK concept
you may be familiar with on other platforms.
Basically what we mean by SDK is a set of all the headers
and libraries that originally shipped on that version
of Mac OS X, so that you can easily target
that version of Mac OS X by building
against those headers and libraries to avoid API pollution.
By doing this you make sure that for example if
10.4 Tiger is your minimum system requirement
that you don't accidentally use a 10.5 only API.
So we ship several SDKs with Xcode
for 10.3, 10.4 and 10.5,
and you essentially decide what your minimum
system version's going to be and then pick that SDK
to make sure you don't accidentally leak over.
The other thing that you may need once you build up
more complex projects is Xcode configuration files.
And these are basically text files
with the .xcconfig extension
that contain lists of build settings and values.
And the great thing about them is you can
actually reuse them across targets and projects.
You can tell a particular target or project,
get your settings from this config file.
And so you could have dozens of targets in
several projects across your whole hard drive,
all referring back to the same Xcode configuration file,
which would enable you to make a change to a build setting
in one file in one place and instantly have it be
picked up across all of your projects and targets.
So it's great if you're dealing with a very large build
environment with a lot of locking pieces.
So the summary for the build system, we've got
familiar underlying compilers and tools with Xcode.
If you're familiar with GCC or other similar open source
tools and other platforms, you're getting the same tools
on Mac OS X. Xcode puts a flexible architecture on top
of those tools allowing you to insert custom build steps,
customize settings and easily make changes
across all your projects in one fell swoop.
And we give you a seamless work flow to actually
fix the errors and warnings in your project.
You can do it either in the code
editor or in the build results window.
And at the bottom of the slide there's the details
on the session we've been referring to tomorrow.
Next, the debugger.
How many of you write perfect code
the first time every time?
Right. Hello World's a killer isn't it.
( Laughter )
Under the hood Xcode uses gdb.
So if you prefer that, if you're familiar
with that Xcode can give you access to that,
but we think you'll prefer the much richer
functionality that the rest of Xcode's debugger provides.
Here's Xcode's debugger window so when you do find that
rare bug you may have inserted in your code, you can go in
and debug it and you can bring up Xcode's debugger window
and this is going to provide a very similar functionality
to what you are perhaps familiar with in other platforms.
So you can stop at a breakpoint, you can continue, you
can step into, you can customize breakpoints, and so on.
But as we're fixing errors and
warnings, we think there's a better way.
You can actually do a lot of your
debugging right in the code editor.
And this makes sense if you just wrote this chunk of code
and you just fixed the bugs in it, why should you have to go
to some other window to actually go in and debug it.
And so that's what the editor let's you do.
You can actually customize breakpoints right in the editor,
you get the little mini debugger toolbar across the top
that allows you to step over, step into and so on,
just like you could in the full debugger window.
For those cases when you want to see what's inside
a variable, you can simply hover over that variable
with your mouse and Xcode will give you the contents of it.
So it's very easy, very intuitive
to just start mousing around
and hover over things and find out what the values are.
Now whether you prefer working in Xcode's
dedicated debugger window or in the code editor,
either way you're going to get a rich set of functionality.
You'll be able to customize breakpoints, set watch points
and view expressions, view variables and collections
and data tips and even customize variable formatting.
You can decide if you would prefer for results for a
particular variable to always be presented a certain way.
One of Xcode 3.0s most powerful features
is its seamless run/debug/run workflow.
And what this means is you can run
your application not in the debugger,
it'll launch quickly, you'll see it right there.
When you reach a point in your app where
you actually want to set a breakpoint
and start debugging, simply add the breakpoint.
And Xcode will automatically attach the
debugger to that running application,
there's no need to stop your app relaunch
it on the debugger and keep going.
So things are very smooth, Xcode
automatically attaches the debugger,
you fix the problem when you remove the breakpoint,
the debugger detaches and you just keep working.
So it's a very seamless flow back and
forth between running and debugging.
Xcode also saves you time by allowing
you to restart, which means,
run your application again the same way you did last time.
And that could mean running it again under the debugger,
it could mean running it again with a performance tool,
see you don't have to reselect the
same options over and over again,
Xcode remembers what you did and lets
you easily do that again.
And to show you this, I'd like to bring
up Scott Tooker again to give you a demo.
( Clapping )
>> Okay, so I'm here in align left edges and I
want to go ahead and let's just build and go.
And you can see here's sketch and it's
all loaded, let's create some circles.
And what I've done, I've selected them all and now I'm
going to go ahead and align them and I want a break.
Oh, that's right I need to set a breakpoint.
So as you can see I'm just running here.
In the past what we've had to do is actually as Matt says,
you have to quit out, set up your debugger again and go.
Now what we do is just set a breakpoint, let me
go back here, let me go ahead and just reselect
that align call and boom right into debugger.
So?
( Clapping )
And you'll also notice I've kept, I've stayed in my
editor window, haven't brought up a new window yet.
I've added now this debugger bar up along top
that has all the common functionality I'd need.
But let's take a short detour; I want to show off the
main debugger window, especially since a lot of you coming
from Windows, probably more familiar with an
interface that looks more similar to this.
You'll see on the left I have my stack frame list,
I have a thread pop up, over I have variables
and then down at the bottom I've got my source code.
And so I can go ahead and as Matt said I can do step
over, I can step into, I can continue from here.
But with Xcode 3, we actually wanted to have
something that was more tied to the editor.
There's no reason I should have to come to this
other window for most of my debugging needs.
So we introduced some new things
called data tips and step controls.
And I'm just going to show them here to you just briefly.
So first off we have data tips.
And so for example here, let me go ahead and step
a little bit, in fact, and so you can go here
and okay now this has been evaluated
and I can see that C is equal to 8.
Well, that's great, I could hit this step next and
look at things as they evaluate or I could just,
I really want to get down to this bottom part
here where I'm actually setting up some bounds.
So another thing we added were step controls and so
for this case, I can just click on the step control,
what is going on, okay well normally I
could, let me try something, yeah I know,
I'm going to go ahead, I'm going to try that one more time.
Come on?
>> Usually this works great.
>> Yes, every other time we practiced it it worked fine.
But that's always how demos are.
So let's go ahead, there we go.
So as you can see with the step control when it's
working the way it should, you actually get to go ahead
and step in line, you can just click right in line,
right in your editor and you just jump to this line
and now I can actually go and look at all
these other things and just investigate.
For example, current bounds here I can actually drill in
and look at the individual point and size information.
You'll also notice along the side
here, that we have summary information.
And this is a feature of Xcode we call data formatters.
We provided it; there are two ways we provide it.
This is a very simple, in this case we're just
using a very simple kind of mark up language
so you can just say I want to see
x equals y equals and so on.
We also provide for those of you that have more
complex custom types, you can actually write plug ins
to the debugger so you can just display
information about your custom code.
Now in addition to that, we also,
as you notice here as I move around,
I'm just kind of using the syntactic information we
already have to say, oh, current bounds that's a symbol,
I know that and we can go look up the information.
However, we can do more than that, we can also, for
example, notice that when we're looking at structures,
we can drill down into that structure automatically so
for example here I can look at the origin which is a point
or I can move over and just look at x in that point.
We can also do evaluation.
So just to be clear here, what I've done is I've actually
selected curGraphic bounds and then asked the debugger
to evaluate it right now and then show me the information
and so you see here, oops let's bring that back up,
that I'm actually looking at the structure and
that I've got live information about the data.
And it goes even further than that because actually if I
go down to curbounds here, which is the current bounds
of the graphic I'm about to set, I can select that.
Actually I don't need to evaluate it.
I can select that, I can for example
go down into the size and just inline?
( Sigh )
Inline. I can go ahead and change it right there.
And so when I decide to go ahead and say
continue, and bring back up sketch you'll notice
that I've actually had an affect directly
on the program while it was running.
So there's actually a lot more to the debugger experience.
We're going to be covering a lot more of this in the
Xcode New Workflow, especially issues about being able
to quickly jump in and out of functions,
but this is just a brief overview
that hopefully shows you the power of the debugger.
Matt.
>> Thank you Scott.
( Clapping )
So what did you just see?
You saw that you could actually get a lot of your common
everyday debugging tasks done right in the code editor.
Now you can control breakpoints and message bubbles, you
can view variables and data tips in line and so really a lot
of your day will be spent right in the code editor.
Writing code, building code, debugging
it and it's a very seamless flow
and experience as Andreas talked about yesterday.
Sometimes if you want to do a broader
investigation you might want to bring
up the debugger window, it's there if you need it.
But we think that the seamless run/debug/run experience of
Xcode will be much appreciated as you develop applications.
So edit, build, debug, those are kind of the
core things that an integrated environment does.
But there's actually more things to your project that
you need to keep track of that you'd like for the project
to be able to handle for you and we don't have time
to go into these aspects and detail in this session.
But I just wanted to touch on three of them briefly so that
you know that Xcode can do these things and you can find
which sessions you should go to to find out more.
First of all, Xcode's source code management system.
We actually support three systems Subversion, Perforce
and CVS, and where the underlying SCM system supports
it will actually give you a nice browser for
you to easily browse through your repository,
find the project you want and then check it out.
So you configure it and then you can handle
most of your common SCM operations right
from Xcode, check code back in and so on.
We also support refactoring in Xcode and you saw
this demo'd yesterday in the state of the union.
Refactoring basically allows you to quickly,
safely and broadly upgrade or change your code,
either to make it more maintainable or make it easier to
add new features to your code, such as new Leopard features.
And you could use find and replace, very
manual thing to do to try and accomplish this,
but it's going to be much more error prone.
And why do all that when you have tools to do
this for you? And that's what refactoring is about
and there's a session on that on Thursday in The Presidio.
And finally the Organizer; this was demo'd yesterday
and there are two key ways you'll
probably find yourself using the Organizer,
first as a way to manage and view all of your projects.
So if you're doing particularly native developing
from Mac OS X, Cocoa applications for example,
you'll be using projects primarily and you can drag
those projects into the Organizer easily get to them,
open them up, build them right from the Organizer.
If you are more of an open source kind of guy
and you don't want to use a full Xcode project
for your development you can actually still use
the Organizer, simply drag in folders of code,
we've go build in support from Make, AutoConf and
Ant and you can actually customize actions as well.
The Organizer gives you easy access to your projects, a free
form development workflow and the ability to extend it based
on your needs and we have a whole
session on the Organizer on Thursday,
it's called Project Free Xcode,
Mixed Language Development.
So, what have we seen in this session?
We've seen that Xcode's intuitive workflow helps accelerate
your development by giving you a very editor centric focus;
you don't have to keep bringing up
other windows to get your work done.
Xcode's build system gives you the power based
on industry standard tools and also the ability
to customize the build system based on your needs.
And finally we've seen that Xcode makes development more
fun by handling common tasks for you, like SCM operations,
refactoring and helping organize your code.
For more information you can email me with feedback,
mformica@apple.com, I'm the Software Evangelist.
There's also a variety of chunks of
documentation for Xcode I encourage you to read.